=================
 Getting started
=================

Start out by running the SMTP server from the command line to ensure that
aiosmtpd has been installed correctly. If you want the SMTP server to do
interesting things instead of just printing incoming mail to the console, you
need to write a bit of Python code to specify how incoming mail should be
handled.

.. _cli:

Command line usage
==================

This package provides a main entry point which can be used to run the
server on the command line.  There are two ways to run the server, depending
on how the package has been installed.

You can run the server by passing it to Python directly::

    $ python3 -m aiosmtpd -n

This starts a server on localhost, port 8025 without setting the uid to
'nobody' (i.e. because you aren't running it as root).  Once you've done that,
you can connect directly to the server using your favorite command line
protocol tool.  Type the ``QUIT`` command at the server once you see the
greeting::

    % telnet localhost 8025
    Trying 127.0.0.1...
    Connected to localhost.
    Escape character is '^]'.
    220 subdivisions Python SMTP ...
    QUIT
    221 Bye
    Connection closed by foreign host.

Of course, you could use Python's smtplib_ module, or any other SMTP client to
talk to the server.  Just hit control-C at the server to stop it.

The entry point may also be installed as the ``aiosmtpd`` command, so this is
equivalent to the above ``python3`` invocation::

    $ aiosmtpd -n


Options
-------

Optional arguments include:

``-h``, ``--help``
    Show this help message and exit.

``-n``, ``--nosetuid``
    This program generally tries to setuid ``nobody``, unless this flag is
    set.  The setuid call will fail if this program is not run as root (in
    which case, use this flag).

``-c CLASSPATH``, ``--class CLASSPATH``
    Use the given class, as a Python dotted import path, as the :ref:`handler
    class <handlers>` for SMTP events.  This class can process received
    messages and do other actions during the SMTP dialog.  Uses a debugging
    handler by default.

``-s SIZE``, ``--size SIZE``
    Restrict the total size of the incoming message to ``SIZE`` number of
    bytes via the RFC 1870 ``SIZE`` extension.  Defaults to 33554432 bytes.

``-u``, ``--smtputf8``
    Enable the SMTPUTF8 extension and behave as an RFC 6531 SMTP proxy.

``-d``, ``--debug``
    Increase debugging output.

``-l [HOST:PORT]``, ``--listen [HOST:PORT]``
    Optional host and port to listen on.  If the PORT part is not given, then
    port 8025 is used.  If only :PORT is given, then localhost is used for the
    hostname.  If neither are given, localhost:8025 is used.

Optional positional arguments provide additional arguments to the handler
class constructor named in the ``--class`` option.  Provide as many of these
as supported by the handler class's ``from_cli()`` class method, if provided.


.. _smtplib: https://docs.python.org/3/library/smtplib.html

.. _controller:

Programmatic usage
==================

Custom behavior for the SMTP server is specified via a *handler* which is
invoked by aiosmtpd when a new message is available.

For example, say you want to receive email for ``example.com`` and print
incoming mail data to the console.  Start by implementing a handler as follows::

    >>> import asyncio
    >>> class ExampleHandler:
    ...     @asyncio.coroutine
    ...     def handle_RCPT(self, server, session, envelope, address, rcpt_options):
    ...         if not address.endswith('@example.com'):
    ...             return '550 not relaying to that domain'
    ...         envelope.rcpt_tos.append(address)
    ...         return '250 OK'
    ...
    ...     @asyncio.coroutine
    ...     def handle_DATA(self, server, session, envelope):
    ...         print('Message from %s' % envelope.mail_from)
    ...         print('Message for %s' % envelope.rcpt_tos)
    ...         print('Message data:\n')
    ...         print(envelope.content.decode('utf8', errors='replace'))
    ...         print('End of message')
    ...         return '250 Message accepted for delivery'

The SMTP server can be started using a *controller* which runs the SMTP server
in a separate thread with a dedicated event loop.  Pass the above handler to a
controller instance and start it::

    >>> from aiosmtpd.controller import Controller
    >>> controller = Controller(ExampleHandler())
    >>> controller.start()

The SMTP thread might run into errors during its setup phase; to catch this
the main thread will timeout when waiting for the SMTP server to become ready.
By default the timeout is set to 1 second but can be changed either by using
the ``AIOSMTPD_CONTROLLER_TIMEOUT`` environment variable or by passing a
different ``ready_timeout`` duration to the Controller's constructor.

Connect to the server and send a message, which then gets printed by
``ExampleHandler``.

    >>> from smtplib import SMTP
    >>> client = SMTP(controller.hostname, controller.port)
    >>> r = client.sendmail('aperson@example.com', ['bperson@example.com'], """\
    ... From: Anne Person <anne@example.com>
    ... To: Bart Person <bart@example.com>
    ... Subject: A test
    ... Message-ID: <ant>
    ...
    ... Hi Bart, this is Anne.
    ... """)
    Message from aperson@example.com
    Message for ['bperson@example.com']
    Message data:
    <BLANKLINE>
    From: Anne Person <anne@example.com>
    To: Bart Person <bart@example.com>
    Subject: A test
    Message-ID: <ant>
    <BLANKLINE>
    Hi Bart, this is Anne.
    <BLANKLINE>
    End of message

If we try to send a message to a recipient not inside ``example.com``,
it is rejected by ``ExampleHandler.handle_RCPT()``::

    >>> r = client.sendmail('aperson@example.com', ['cperson@example.net'], """\
    ... From: Anne Person <anne@example.com>
    ... To: Chris Person <chris@example.net>
    ... Subject: Another test
    ... Message-ID: <another>
    ...
    ... Hi Chris, this is Anne.
    ... """)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    smtplib.SMTPRecipientsRefused: {'cperson@example.net': (550, b'not relaying to that domain')}

When you're done with the SMTP server, stop it via the controller.

    >>> controller.stop()

The server is guaranteed to be stopped.

    >>> import socket
    >>> client.connect(controller.hostname, controller.port)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    ConnectionRefusedError: ...


The aiosmtpd library contains :ref:`base handler classes <handlers>` that may
be used to quickly gain common functionality such as parsing the incoming mail
data into an instance of ``email.message.Message``.

For a full overview of the methods that handler classes may implement,
see :ref:`Handler hooks <hooks>`.

In order to extend the protocol by e.g. adding support for custom SMTP
commands, see :ref:`The SMTP class <smtp>`.


Enable SMTPUTF8
---------------

It's very common to want to enable the ``SMTPUTF8`` ESMTP option, therefore
this is the default for the ``Controller`` constructor.  For backward
compatibility reasons, this is *not* the default for the ``SMTP`` class
though.  If you want to disable this in the ``Controller``, you can pass this
argument into the constructor::

    >>> from aiosmtpd.handlers import Sink
    >>> controller = Controller(Sink(), enable_SMTPUTF8=False)
    >>> controller.start()

    >>> client = SMTP(controller.hostname, controller.port)
    >>> code, message = client.ehlo('me')
    >>> code
    250

The EHLO response does not include the ``SMTPUTF8`` ESMTP option.

    >>> lines = message.decode('utf-8').splitlines()
    >>> # Don't print the server host name line, since that's variable.
    >>> for line in lines[1:]:
    ...     print(line)
    SIZE 33554432
    8BITMIME
    HELP

    >>> controller.stop()
